Information from a steel company that uses oxygen lance nozzles in steelmaking suggests that the current method for removing lance tips due to surface wear during operation for maintenance is subjective, heavily relying on visual inspection. This results in either premature or delayed removal of the tips, leading to adverse economic and safety implications. To mitigate these impacts on maintenance activities, operator safety, instrument lifespan, and operational costs, this study proposes a methodological basis that includes the detection and segmentation of the wear region in oxygen lance nozzles and a digital image processing method for measuring the depth of the wear region on surfaces, so that future software and field prototypes can use it as a basis for automation to have an ideal indicator for the removal of the operating equipment. For this research, instance segmentation was employed using the Yolact model to detect and segment the wear region on the surface of oxygen lance nozzles. Additionally, an algorithm was developed that also serves as a methodological basis for measuring wear on these surfaces, using the Intel RealSense software development kit for the D435 depth camera. The results indicate that the detection and segmentation of the wear region on the surfaces of oxygen lance nozzles through an automated system is promising but subject to specific improvements in the dataset for greater assertiveness. Furthermore, they show that depth measurement of surface wear, using the RealSense D435 software development kit, serves as a technological basis for field algorithms to use according to their specific needs. The combined use of these algorithms as a technological basis for field technologies applied to the topic of oxygen lance nozzle maintenance can not only minimize the impact on the maintenance plan but also extend the equipment's lifespan, reduce operational costs, and ensure greater safety for operators.
